---
layout: post
title: Automating Wordle
date: 2022-01-20 18:02
comments: true
tags: game, information theory
---

It's been a weird day.

Erin's family has recently been into a word game called [Wordle][wordle].
Inevitably it spilled into Erin's life, and subsequently into mine. The rules
are simple: there's a secret five-letter word, and you need to find it by
guessing words. If your word shares a letter in the same place as the secret
word, that letter is marked as green. If you have a letter in a different place,
but also in the secret word, it's marked as yellow.

[wordle]: https://www.powerlanguage.co.uk/wordle/

The goal is to find the secret word in six guesses or fewer. Yesterday's, for
example, was "pilot."

After two days of doing it by hand, like a damn pleb, I decided it would be more
fun to try to automate this game. So I spent all day thinking about how to do
it, and eventually came up with a nice strategy. This blog post documents it,
taking time to explain how it works, and more importantly, why.


## Measuring Information

The trick to Wordle is to extract as much information from your guesses as
possible. But what does it mean to "extract" information? Is information
something we can put a number on?

Rather surprisingly, the answer is yes.

Let's illustrate the idea by ignoring Wordle for a moment. Instead, imagine I
have a buried treasure, somewhere on this map:

<center><img src="/images/wordle/map0.png"></center>

You don't know where the treasure is, but you can ask me some yes/no questions,
and I promise to answer truthfully. In six questions, can you find the treasure?

The trick here is to be very strategic about how you ask your questions. For
example, the first question you ask might be "is the treasure on the left half
of the map?", to which I reply yes. We can now redraw the map, using red to
highlight the places the treasure could still be:

<center><img src="/images/wordle/map1.png"></center>

Next you can ask "is the treasure on the bottom half *of the remaining red
region?*" I say no. Thus the treasure is on the top half, and our refined map
looks like this:

<center><img src="/images/wordle/map2.png"></center>

"Is the treasure on the right half?" Yes.

<center><img src="/images/wordle/map3.png"></center>

"Top?" No.

<center><img src="/images/wordle/map4.png"></center>

You get the idea. By phrasing subsequent questions like this, each time we cut
in half the remaining possible hiding spots for the treasure. When we find the
treasure, we're done.

To quantify the amount of information necessary to find the treasure, we need
only count how many questions we asked. If we can go from the full map to
finding the treasure in 7 questions, we say we needed *7 bits* of information to
find it.

In general, the information required to solve a problem is the number of times
we need to split the space in half in order to find what we were looking for.
Information is measured in "bits."


## Back To Wordle

How does any of this apply to Wordle? The first question to ask ourselves is
just how much information is required to win the game. But what does that mean?
We're trying to find one particular five-letter word in the entire English
language. So, how many five-letter words are there in the English language?
Nobody knows for sure, but I wrote a program to look through the dictionary, and
it came up with **5150 words.**

If we need to find one word in particular out of these 5150, how many times do
we need to cut it in half? Let's do the math:

```
  5150 / 2
= 2575 / 2
= 1288 / 2
= 644  / 2
= 322  / 2
= 161  / 2
= 81   / 2
= 41   / 2
= 21   / 2
= 11   / 2
= 6    / 2
= 3    / 2
= 2    / 2
= 1
```

Thirteen cuts! It takes thirteen cuts to trim down the search space of all
possible Wordle words down to a single word. Thus, analogously to our hidden
treasure, we need thirteen bits of information in order to find the secret word.


## Discovering Information

Knowing the amount of information necessary to solve Wordle is one thing, but
where does that information actually come from? Recall, the rules of the game
*don't even let us* ask yes or no questions; all we're allowed to do is guess a
five-letter word.

How can we turn a five-letter word into a yes/no question? Much like with the
buried treasure, it helps to have a lay of the land. Imagine that by some
chance, exactly half the words in the dictionary had an `e` in them, and the
other half had no `e`. Then, by guessing a word that contains an `e`, we could
narrow down the possible words by half depending on whether or not we got a
yellow result from Wordle.

Imagine by another coincidence that exactly half the words in the dictionary had
an `s` in them, and the other half didn't. We could further refine our
possibilities by guessing a word that has an `s` as well as an `e`.

So that's the idea. Of course, no letter is going to be in exactly half of the
words, but some will be *more* "exactly half" than others. We can inspect the
dictionary, and find the letters which are most "balanced." Doing that, we get
the following:

```
e: 203
a: 497
r: 641
o: 969
t: 981
l: 1019
i: 1021
s: 1079
n: 1215
u: 1401
c: 1419
y: 1481
h: 1557
d: 1575
p: 1623
g: 1715
m: 1719
b: 1781
f: 1901
k: 1911
w: 1927
v: 2017
x: 2241
z: 2245
q: 2257
j: 2261
```

The numbers here measure the imbalance of each letter. That is, there are 203
fewer words that contain `e` than do not. On the other end, there are `2261`
more words that don't contain `j` than do. This means that by guessing `e`,
we are going to get a much more even split than by guessing `j`.

The letters with lower numbers give us more information on average than the
letters with big numbers. And remember, information is the name of the game
here.

By forming a five-letter word out of the most-balanced letters on this list, we
can extract approximately five bits of information from the system. So that
means we'd like to come up with a word from the letters `earot` if at all
possible. Unfortunately, there is no such word, so we need to look a little
further and also pull in `l`. Now we can make a word from `earotl`---`later`!

Since `later` is formed from the most balanced letters in the word set, it has
the *highest expected information.* By trying `later` first, we are
statistically most likely to learn more than any other guess.

Let's see how it does against yesterday's word `pilot`. We get:

ðŸŸ¨â¬›ðŸŸ¨â¬›â¬›

No greens, but we know that the secret word (pilot) doesn't have any `a`s, `e`s
or `r`s. Furthermore, we know it does have both a `l` and a `t`. Therefore, we
can eliminate a huge chunk of our words, for example:

- `titan` because the secret word has no `a`
- `cupid` because it doesn't have an `l`

and, as you can imagine, lots of other words.

In fact, the number of words remaining is 27. They are:

```
blitz,blunt,built,cloth,clout,filth,flint,flout,glint,
guilt,hotly,light,limit,lofty,lusty,moult,pilot,quilt,
sloth,spilt, split,still,stilt,stool,tulip,unlit,until
```

We can check how many bits of information we extracted:

```
log2 (5150 / 27) = 7.58
```

We managed to extract nearly 8 bits of information from this one guess! That's
significantly better than the 5 we should have gotten "theoretically." Not bad
at all!

Our next guess can be found in the same way. Take the 27 remaining words, and
figure out which letters are best balanced among them:

```
u: 5
i: 7
o: 9
s: 13
h: 17
n: 17
f: 19
p: 19
b: 21
g: 21
y: 21
c: 23
m: 23
q: 25
z: 25
a: 27
d: 27
e: 27
j: 27
k: 27
l: 27
r: 27
t: 27
v: 27
w: 27
x: 27
```

Notice that several letters have an unbalanced count of 27. This means either
all the words have (or do not have) this letter, and thus, these are completely
unhelpful letters to guess.

Of our remaining 27, the most balanced word we can make from these letters is
`until`.  But notice that `until` uses both `t` and `l`, which we already
learned from `later`!

We can do better by picking a word from the original dictionary which is most
balanced according to these numbers. That word is `using`. Let's use it for our
next guess, which results in:

â¬›â¬›ðŸŸ¨â¬›â¬›

We're left with only four words:

```
blitz,filth,limit,pilot
```

Rinse and repeat, by finding the most balanced letters in the remaining
possibilities, and then finding the best word in the dictionary made out of
those letters. The next guess is `morph`:

â¬›ðŸŸ¨â¬›ðŸŸ¨â¬›

Which eliminates all words except for `pilot`. Nice.

With that, we've successfully automated away playing a fun game. Yay? This
strategy works for any word, and hones in on it extremely quickly.

All the code can be found on [Github.](https://gist.github.com/isovector/00c7974588e5e1dfeb94f2ea7a7ef675)

